India is well known for its diversified nature and climate. Every year the country witnesses mainly four major seasons i.e. summer, monsoon, post-monsoon, winter. Each season has its own charm and characteristics. The duration of each season ranges from three to four months. In a nutshell, India is a tropical region.The summer season mainly starts in April and stays until the month of June. Due to the country’s tropical nature, the summer season gets extremely hot in some parts of India such as Rajasthan, Gujarat, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh experiences the scorching heat of the summer sun. The temperature ranges from 30 to 40 degrees Celsius during this season and the length of the day is generally longer than the length of the night. The highest temperature during the summer season could be 50 to 52 degrees Celsius.Monsoon follows the summer season and brings relief to everyone’s life. Monsoon stays for three to four months. It begins at the end of June and stays until September. The origins of the Indian monsoon are basically the Arabian sea and the Bay of Bengal. The first monsoon rains in India are witnessed in the state of Kerala. Some other regions too experienced heavy downpours, especially the south-western part of India (Mumbai, Nashik, Nagpur, etc).There comes the post-monsoon season which stays for two seasons approximately i.e. October and November. Some also refer to this season as Autumn in India. This is the transition phase between the monsoon and the winter season. This transition period brings very comfortable and pleasant weather which prepares everyone for the dry winter season. Some regions might witness a little bit of deluge at this time.Thereafter, this season is followed by the most awaited season - winter. The temperature can go down to 10 to 15 degrees Celsius in this season. The extreme north and north-eastern region of India also witnesses heavy snowfall in this time of the year, i.e., Kashmir, Uttarakhand, etc, and other northern regions see an extreme fall in the temperature. The temperature might be around minus 5 to 5 degrees Celsius. The coldest months in the entire year are December and January. As opposed to summer, the season has the longest nights compared to the days.Effect on Season ChangeDue to heavy pollution, some disturbances have been created in India's generally smooth seasonal cycles. Various activities like urbanization, industrialization, deforestation, etc., have affected the seasonal changes in India. Excessive deforestation for residential buildings and industries to cope with the growing demands. People have led to the loss of valuable green forests in the country. By this, a disturbance is caused in the rainfall pattern and has led to floods and drought in various countries.As stated earlier, India experiences four major seasons. They are summer, winter, monsoon, and post-monsoon. Each season occurs at different times covering the whole year. The average time of each season varies from two to three months.

The summer season starts in April and ends around the month of June. As India is a tropical country, the summer is a bit harsh in some of its regions. Moreover, the highest temperatures recorded in India till date during summer is 51 Celsius in the state of Rajasthan. The temperature usually remains around 32 to 40 Celsius during summers. Furthermore, the days are usually longer than nights during this season.

Then comes the season of monsoon which begins in June or July and stretches till September. The majority of the precipitation that takes place is due to the south-west monsoons. These monsoons originate in the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. Monsoons in India witness a heavy downpour which often results in floods in many regions.

Next up, we have the post-monsoon season. It falls in the months of October and November. This season basically marks the transition from a wet season to a dry season. This transition witness drops in temperatures and prepares the people for winters.

Finally, we have winters in India that fall between October to January. The temperature during this season ranges from 10 to 15 degree Celsius. In the northern regions of the country, snowfall also happens along with rain. The coldest months in India are December and January. The nights are longer than the days during winters in India.

Get the huge list of more than 500 Essay Topics and Ideas

The Specialty of Each Season
Each season in India carries a specialty with them. Everyone has one or the other things they enjoy doing in each season. While some enjoy summers due to the sun and enjoyment, some like winters because of the chilly weather. Nonetheless, each season carries a special essence with them.

During summers, kids are the most excited lot. They like summers because they get to have ice cream and cold drinks. They get a month-long vacation break which means more time to play and visit new places. Summer camps are held in various schools to encourage kids and enhance their skills.

Winters are enjoyed by people because of the cool and chilly weather. In the hilly areas, they also have snowfall which allows them to enjoy various sports like snowboarding, ice skating and more. People also enjoy the cozy feels of their blanket by the fireside, sipping on hot coffee and soups.

Furthermore, monsoon is a season which many look forward to. The farmers enjoy monsoon for their crops gets an adequate supply of water. Children love playing in the rain and making paper boats. The adults enjoy their hot tea and deep-fried fritters with sauce when it rains, making it even more enjoyable.

In short, each season is special in its own way. Indians are lucky to experience so many seasons as not all countries get the opportunity to enjoy such varied seasons.
